[blog] Add Toolpad beta announcement blog (#37799)
mui/material-ui: docs/pages/blog/2023-toolpad-beta-announcement.md

---

> title: Toolpad is now in Beta!

Reviewer: How about this for a flashier and more descriptive title? I don't think we've ever published an "official" public announcement about Toolpad, so this could be it.

```suggestion
title: Introducing Toolpad: MUI's low-code admin builder framework
```

> description: After working on it for more than a year, Toolpad is now in the next stage. Read more about it in this announcement.

Reviewer: Let's try to reframe this to center the reader and answer "what's in it for me?"

```suggestion
description: Assemble admin panels and internal tools faster than ever before with Toolpad—now in beta.
```

date: 2023-07-03T00:00:00.000Z
authors: ['prakhargupta']
card: true
tags: ['Product', 'News']
---

It's been over a year since we released the first version of Toolpad. Today, we're excited to take the next step on that journey with the release of Toolpad Beta. If you aren't familiar with Toolpad yet, it's an admin panel builder catering to the internal tooling needs of an organization. It's for developers who want to build a functional application quickly. It harnesses the speed of a UI builder for the front-end and closely integrates with your normal development workflow. If this excites you, then read on!

## Why did we decide to build Toolpad?

> Toolpad was created to meet the needs of the MUI community. We conducted a few surveys, did our market research, and concluded to make an internal tool builder as it resonates with MUI's mission of 'Building applications fast.'

Reviewer: It's not really MUI building apps fast, but rather us giving devs the tools to do so.

```suggestion
Toolpad was created to meet the needs of the MUI community. We conducted surveys, did our market research, and concluded to make an internal tool builder because the idea resonates with MUI's mission of empowering developers to build app faster and more efficiently.
```

> Internal tools are software applications that are developed and used within an organization. They can be used to automate tasks, manage data, and collaborate with other employees. Internal tools can be a valuable asset for businesses of all sizes, as they can help to improve efficiency, productivity, and communication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Internal tools are software applications that are developed and used within an organization. They can automate tasks, manage data, and help foster collaboration. Internal tools can be a valuable asset for businesses of all sizes, as they can help to improve efficiency, productivity, and communication.
```

> A sub-optimal tool means a waste of time and effort for everyone, maintaining them distracts developers from solving actual business problems. We've all had our fair share of wrestling with lousy internal tools that we hoped we'd never have to use more than once. Lately, customer-side software has moved fast and is now flashy and sleek. It's time for internal tools to see this change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A sub-optimal tool means a waste of time and effort for everyone—maintaining them distracts developers from solving actual business problems. We've all had our fair share of wrestling with lousy internal tools that we hoped we'd never have to use more than once. In recent years, customer-side software has moved quickly and is now flashy and sleek. It's time for internal tools to get this same upgrade.
```

## What is Toolpad exactly?

> Toolpad is an open-source, low-code drag-drop admin builder framework. The primary purpose of Toolpad is to create data-intensive React apps faster. Toolpad simplifies writing back-end logic, connecting to a data source, querying or mutating the data, and deploying an app. It can quickly convert an API, script, or SQL query to a web UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Toolpad is an open-source, low-code, drag-and-drop admin builder framework. The primary purpose of Toolpad is to create data-intensive React apps faster. Toolpad simplifies writing back-end logic, connecting to a data source, querying and mutating data, and deploying an app. It can quickly convert an API, script, or SQL query into a web UI.
```

> Toolpad is not ideal for building static web pages, mobile apps, or customer-facing custom-designed frontends. It's for building admin applications, CRUD interfaces, custom internal tools, and analytics dashboards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Toolpad is not ideal for building static web pages, mobile apps, or customer-facing custom-designed front ends. It's for building admin applications, CRUD interfaces, custom internal tools, and analytics dashboards.
```

<img alt="Building an application on Toolpad " src="/static/blog/2023-toolpad-beta-announcement/toolpad.png" style="margin-bottom: 16px;" loading="lazy" width="2048" height="1536" />

## Who is Toolpad for?

> Before the arrival of Toolpad, MUI primarily catered to the front-end needs of the development process. Our products were mostly useful for React engineers or designers. We saw many full-stack engineers use our advanced components for data-intensive apps. These highly customizable components are well-suited for complex apps but not all apps require the same level of customization: for example, internal tools just need basic theming.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before the arrival of Toolpad, MUI primarily catered to the front-end needs of the development process. Our products were mostly useful for React engineers or designers. We saw many full-stack engineers use our advanced components for data-intensive apps. These highly customizable components are well-suited for complex apps, but not all apps require the same level of customization: for example, internal tools just need basic theming.
```

> Toolpad is for full-stack and back-end developers. They build/manage/integrate data pipelines, server-side logic, database, microservices, APIs—and know the most about them. Sharing these endpoints and maintaining the internal documentation with the front-end teams is a hassle that lasts forever. Toolpad empowers you to take the next step and build a UI using our drag-and-drop editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Toolpad is for full-stack and back-end developers. They build, manage, and integrate data pipelines, server-side logic, databases, microservices, and APIs—and know the most about them. Sharing these endpoints and maintaining the internal documentation with the front-end teams is a hassle that lasts forever. Toolpad empowers you to take the next step and build the UI you need using our drag-and-drop editor.
```

> ## What are the top-features available today?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What are the main features available today?
```

### Use MUI Core and MUI X Pro components

> MUI Core provides all modern components; a chosen few are available inside Toolpad. MUI X Pro (Data Grid and Date Picker) components are also available for free in Toolpad.

Reviewer: To reassure users about what's planned (assuming this is true!)

```suggestion
MUI Core provides all modern components; a chosen few are currently available inside Toolpad, and we're adding more all the time. MUI X Pro (Data Grid and Date Picker) components are also available for free in Toolpad.
```

### Bring your own components

Toolpad supports bringing your [external components](https://mui.com/toolpad/concepts/custom-components/) to the project. Your past effort should not go to waste—we don't believe in a walled garden approach. In the future, we'll also support importing from Storybook and GitHub.

> ### Bring your own backend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Bring your own back end
```

> Directly integrate with your node.js backend and have your data available on the page without writing any REST endpoints or fetch logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Directly integrate with your Node.js back end and have your data available on the page without writing any REST endpoints or fetch logic.
```

### Write custom functions in your IDE

Toolpad works with your code editor and lets you write [custom functions](https://mui.com/toolpad/concepts/connecting-to-data/#custom-functions). These functions:

> - run on the backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- run on the back end.
```

> - return the data that is made available on the page without requiring you to set up any endpoints, or data fetching logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- return the data that is made available on the page without requiring you to set up any endpoints or data-fetching logic.
```

> - support arguments can be bound directly to page state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- support arguments that can be bound directly to page state.
```

> - can be integrate not only with any node module, but also with your backend code, such as prisma models or database connections

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- can be integrated not only with any node module, but also with your back-end code, such as Prisma models or database connections.
```

### Own your code

> Toolpad runs fully locally, all configuration is stored in local files which you can version control, edit and deploy any way you want.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Toolpad runs fully locally. All configuration is stored in local files which you can version-control, edit, and deploy any way you want.
```

## How is Toolpad different from similar products on the market?

> Toolpad follows an open-core approach, meaning that the base version is open source. You can build an unlimited number of apps, and the basic service will be free forever. There exist some amazing tools like Retool, Appsmith, Budibase, Airplane, Interval but only some of them are open source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Toolpad follows an open-core approach, meaning that the base version is open source. You can build an unlimited number of apps, and the basic service will be free forever. Among similar products like Retool, Appsmith, Budibase, Airplane, and Interval, only some are open source.
```

> Another major area of difference is being only developer focused. As much as we are low-code, we are equally code-friendly. Providing basic functionalities that a developer expects from an open-source tool is non-negotiable for us—we will always prioritize the developer's best interests over all else. With nearly a decade of history building developer tools, we know the long-term benefits of cultivating a close relationship with our community of users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another major area of difference is that Toolpad is solely focused on developers as users. As much as we are low-code, we are equally code-friendly. Providing basic functionalities that a developer expects from an open-source tool is non-negotiable for us—we will always prioritize the developer's best interests over all else. With nearly a decade of history building developer tools, we know the long-term benefits of cultivating a close relationship with our community of users.
```

> Lastly, Toolpad is the only product that offers a drag-and-drop UI builder closely integrated with your favourite IDEs like VS Code. Best of both the worlds!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lastly, Toolpad is the only product that offers a drag-and-drop UI builder closely integrated with your favorite IDEs like VSCode. It's the best of both the worlds!
```

## How can I use Toolpad?

> Toolpad is available as an NPM package and can be installed from [here](https://mui.com/toolpad/getting-started/installation/). You can learn more about Toolpad by visiting the [home page](https://mui.com/toolpad/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Toolpad is available as an NPM package—follow the [Installation guide](https://mui.com/toolpad/getting-started/installation/) in our docs to get started. You can learn more about Toolpad by visiting the [home page](https://mui.com/toolpad/).
```

## What's next?

> We'll continue to build on the vision that doesn't pull you out of your pro-code workflows, instead we want to nest ourselves in areas where we can meaningfully improve the maintainability or speed of development. We want to optimize for the biggest pains that you face when building admin apps. Your inputs will help us shape the future roadmap.

Reviewer: Rephrasing to try to say the same thing with fewer words :)

```suggestion
We plan to continue to iterate on our vision of helping developers increase the speed and efficiency of their workflows. We want to optimize for the biggest pains that you face when building admin apps. Your input is crucial to helping us shape our roadmap from here.
```

The best places to stay up-to-date about what we're currently working on are [GitHub issues](https://github.com/mui/mui-toolpad) and our [public roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/mui/projects/9/views/1).

> If you have any questions or would like to share feedback, you can directly contact the team at toolpad@mui.com. You can also engage in conversations in our [Discord](https://discord.gg/hHqtMP9Ckc) server. If you want to see a demo and discuss your use case, you can schedule it from [this](https://calendly.com/prakhar-mui) Calendly link.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have any questions or would like to share feedback, you can directly contact the team at toolpad@mui.com. You can also engage in conversations in our [Discord](https://discord.gg/hHqtMP9Ckc) server. 

If you'd like an in-depth demo and discussion of your use case, please feel free to [schedule a meeting with me on Calendly](https://calendly.com/prakhar-mui).
```

---
title: Toolpad is now in Beta!
description: After working on it for more than a year, Toolpad is now in the next stage. Read more about it in this announcement.
date: 2023-07-03T00:00:00.000Z
authors: ['prakhargupta']
card: true
tags: ['Product', 'News']
---

> It's been over a year since we released the first version of Toolpad. Today, we're excited to take the next step on that journey with the release of Toolpad Beta. If you aren't familiar with Toolpad yet, it's an admin panel builder catering to the internal tooling needs of an organization. It's for developers who want to build a functional application quickly. It harnesses the speed of a UI builder for the front-end and closely integrates with your normal development workflow. If this excites you, then read on!

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to put backend vs. frontend here

```suggestion
It's been over a year since we released the first version of Toolpad. Today, we're excited to take the next step on that journey with the release of Toolpad Beta. If you aren't familiar with Toolpad yet, it's an admin panel builder catering to the internal tooling needs of an organization. It's for developers who want to build a functional application quickly. It harnesses the speed of a UI builder for the frontend and closely integrates into your backend. If this excites you, then read on!
```

Author: Makes sense.

I used 'front-end' and not front end or frontend form: https://mui.com/material-ui/getting-started/installation/#cdn
and that led to 'back-end' in this entire post.

## Why did we decide to build Toolpad?

Toolpad was created to meet the needs of the MUI community. We conducted surveys, did our market research, and concluded to make an internal tool builder because the idea resonates with MUI's mission of empowering developers to build app faster and more efficiently.

> Internal tools are software applications that are developed and used within an organization. They can automate tasks, manage data, and help foster collaboration. Internal tools can be a valuable asset for businesses of all sizes, as they can help to improve efficiency, productivity, and communication.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Internal tools are software applications that are developed and used within an organization itself. They can automate tasks, manage data, and help foster collaboration. Internal tools are a valuable asset for businesses of all sizes, as they help to improve efficiency, productivity, and communication.
```

> A sub-optimal tool means a waste of time and effort for everyone—maintaining them distracts developers from solving actual business problems. We've all had our fair share of wrestling with lousy internal tools that we hoped we'd never have to use more than once. In recent years, customer-side software has moved quickly and is now flashy and sleek. It's time for internal tools to get this same upgrade.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A sub-optimal tool means a waste of time and effort for everyone. Maintaining them distracts developers from solving actual business problems. We've all had our fair share of wrestling with lousy internal tools that we hoped we'd never have to use more than once. In recent years, customer-facing software has moved quickly and is now flashy and sleek. It's time for internal tools to get this same upgrade.
```

## What is Toolpad exactly?

> Toolpad is an open-source, low-code, drag-and-drop admin builder framework. The primary purpose of Toolpad is to create data-intensive React apps faster. Toolpad simplifies writing back-end logic, connecting to a data source, querying and mutating data, and deploying an app. It can quickly convert an API, script, or SQL query into a web UI.

Reviewer 2: Would we really call this a framework?

```suggestion
Toolpad is an open-source, low-code, drag-and-drop admin builder. The primary purpose of Toolpad is to create data-intensive React apps faster. Toolpad simplifies writing back-end logic, connecting to a data source, querying and mutating data, and deploying an app. It can quickly convert an API, script, or SQL query into a web UI.
```

Author: Removing framework, maybe it is not the right term to define Toolpad.

<iframe style="width:100%; height:350px; border:0; border-radius: 10px; overflow:hidden; margin-bottom: 24px"
src="https://codesandbox.io/p/sandbox/github/mui/mui-toolpad/tree/master/examples/npm-stats?embed=1"
title="Demo of a Toolpad app"
></iframe>

## Who is Toolpad for?

Before the arrival of Toolpad, MUI primarily catered to the front-end needs of the development process. Our products were mostly useful for React engineers or designers. We saw many full-stack engineers use our advanced components for data-intensive apps. These highly customizable components are well-suited for complex apps, but not all apps require the same level of customization: for example, internal tools just need basic theming.

Toolpad is for full-stack and back-end developers. They build, manage, and integrate data pipelines, server-side logic, databases, microservices, and APIs—and know the most about them. Sharing these endpoints and maintaining the internal documentation with the front-end teams is a hassle that lasts forever. Toolpad empowers you to take the next step and build the UI you need using our drag-and-drop editor.

## What are the main features available today?

> ### Use MUI Core and MUI X Pro components

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Use Material UI and MUI X Pro components
```

> MUI Core provides all modern components; a chosen few are currently available inside Toolpad, and we're adding more all the time. MUI X Pro (Data Grid and Date Picker) components are also available for free in Toolpad.

Author: I am resolving it for now, but I'll get back to this point.

> MUI Core provides all modern components; a chosen few are currently available inside Toolpad, and we're adding more all the time. MUI X Pro (Data Grid and Date Picker) components are also available for free in Toolpad.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, missed this comment. Yes, technically the license is part of the code. This was decided long time ago, not sure we thought about it deeply enough.
Not sure how it's different from me scraping a website that uses MUI X pro and extracting the license key that way.

> MUI Core provides all modern components; a chosen few are currently available inside Toolpad, and we're adding more all the time. MUI X Pro (Data Grid and Date Picker) components are also available for free in Toolpad.

Reviewer 3: The decision to include MUI X Pro in Toolpad was made when we were providing a DX similar to Retool. I believe the upside was to not place Toolpad at a disadvantage for choosing Material UI and not Ant Design for the components. But I can't find back the rationale for it.

I like the idea to require a pro plan to be able to use the pro component. Since we moved a lot closer to pro-code, this decision doesn't seem to make sense anymore. I would remove "MUI X Pro (Data Grid and Date Picker) components are also available for free in Toolpad" from the blog post.

However, I do think that it makes sense for the editor to be able to use MUI X Pro, only not for the final output.

From a legal standpoint, developers have a non-open-source dependency when they look at their tree: https://www.npmjs.com/package/@mui/toolpad-app?activeTab=dependencies. This could work for the editor, we could mention how the Toolpad editor comes with a deployment key of MUI X. For use with other applications, we would either not allow it, or we would need to issue a special license.

> MUI Core provides all modern components; a chosen few are currently available inside Toolpad, and we're adding more all the time. MUI X Pro (Data Grid and Date Picker) components are also available for free in Toolpad.

Author: Removed the statement: https://github.com/mui/material-ui/pull/38015 (PR needs approval)

> MUI Core provides all modern components; a chosen few are currently available inside Toolpad, and we're adding more all the time. MUI X Pro (Data Grid and Date Picker) components are also available for free in Toolpad.

Reviewer 2: I'm tracking this in https://github.com/mui/mui-toolpad/issues/2325. We can further refine during our weekly call.

> Toolpad supports bringing your [external components](https://mui.com/toolpad/concepts/custom-components/) to the project. Your past effort should not go to waste—we don't believe in a walled garden approach. In the future, we'll also support importing from Storybook and GitHub.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Toolpad can import [external React components](https://mui.com/toolpad/concepts/custom-components/), ready to be used in its visual designer. Your past effort shouldn't go to waste and you shouldn't be limited by the Toolpad component suite.
```

### Bring your own back end

> Directly integrate with your Node.js back end and have your data available on the page without writing any REST endpoints or fetch logic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Directly integrate with your Node.js back end and have your data available on the page without writing any REST endpoints or fetch logic. Need that prisma model on the page? Expose it through a serverless function and Toolpad does the rest.
```

> ### Write custom functions in your IDE

Reviewer 2: This is the exact same as the previous point. I think we can omit it

Author: Ok. I'll remove this entire section.

Toolpad works with your code editor and lets you write [custom functions](https://mui.com/toolpad/concepts/connecting-to-data/#custom-functions). These functions:

- run on the back end.
- return the data that is made available on the page without requiring you to set up any endpoints or data-fetching logic.
- support arguments can be bound directly to page state.
- can be integrated not only with any node module, but also with your back-end code, such as Prisma models or database connections.

### Own your code

> Toolpad runs fully locally. All configuration is stored in local files which you can version-control, edit, and deploy any way you want.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Toolpad runs fully locally. You're not stuck with an online code editor or a suboptimal github integration. All configuration is stored in local files which you can version-control, edit, and deploy in any way you want.
```

> Toolpad runs fully locally. You're not stuck with an online code editor or a suboptimal github integration. All configuration is stored in local files which you can version-control, edit, and deploy in any way you want.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Toolpad runs fully locally. You're not stuck with an online code editor or a suboptimal GitHub integration. All configuration is stored in local files which you can version-control, edit, and deploy in any way you want.
```

## How is Toolpad different from similar products on the market?

> Toolpad follows an open-core approach, meaning that the base version is open source. You can build an unlimited number of apps, and the basic service will be free forever. Among similar products like Retool, Appsmith, Budibase, Airplane, and Interval, only some are open source.

Reviewer 2: Feels a bit like a weak point. "We're open-source just like others". Besides, "open-core", "open-source" and "free" are terms with different meanings I feel like all it will do is annoy the people who truly care about free software ("free" doesn't always mean "as in beer"). I'd suggest dropping this paragraph.

Reviewer: I can see the value in naming our competitors here to encourage people to associate us with them. We want readers to see Toolpad as a viable alternative to these products, and it's good to point out what makes us unique. But I do agree that what's being pointed out here is a rather weak point.

Another major area of difference is that Toolpad is solely focused on developers as users. As much as we are low-code, we are equally code-friendly. Providing basic functionalities that a developer expects from an open-source tool is non-negotiable for us—we will always prioritize the developer's best interests over all else. With nearly a decade of history building developer tools, we know the long-term benefits of cultivating a close relationship with our community of users.

Lastly, Toolpad is the only product that offers a drag-and-drop UI builder closely integrated with your favorite IDEs like VSCode. It's the best of both the worlds!

## How can I use Toolpad?

> Toolpad is available as an NPM package—follow the [Installation guide](https://mui.com/toolpad/getting-started/installation/) in our docs to get started. You can learn more about Toolpad by visiting the [home page](https://mui.com/toolpad/).

Reviewer 2: I saw these "—" a few times, was this on purpose?
```suggestion
Toolpad is available as an NPM package. Follow the [Installation guide](https://mui.com/toolpad/getting-started/installation/) in our docs to get started. You can learn more about Toolpad by visiting the [home page](https://mui.com/toolpad/).
```

Reviewer: @Janpot that's an [em dash](https://www.thesaurus.com/e/grammar/em-dash/), AKA every editor's favorite punctuation mark. 😅 I'm probably responsible for all of them here. You can think of it as something like halfway between a period and a comma—it's meant to bridge two independent but related ideas, as I've attempted to demonstrate right here.
